# S3 - Simple Storage Service Definition

# S3 Facts
- Object storage: flat files
- Objects consists of:
    - Key (name of object)
    - Value (this is simply the data)
    - Version ID (versioning)
    - Metadata
    - Subresources like access control lists and torrent
- Size: 0 to 5 TBytes
- S3 uses a universal namespace (i.e. unique name)
- Uloaded code get 200 HTTP response.
- A bucket is owned by the AWS account that created it. Bucket ownership is not transferable.
- By default, you can create up to 100 buckets in each of your AWS accounts (maximum is 1000 buckets).
- S3 URL styles are :
    - Virtual hosted style: 
    ```bash
        https://my-bucket.s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/puppy.png (bucket-name + s3 + region )
    ```
    - Path-style access URL **: 
    ```bash
       https://s3.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/mybucket/puppy.jpg (s3 / bucket-name )
 
    ```
    - Static web site URL: bucket name + s3-website + 

    - Legacy global endpoint URL: (has no region)
    ```bash
        s3.amazonaws.com 
    ```
    - ** Buckets created after September 30, 2020, will support only virtual hosted-style requests.

# S3 Features
- Tiered storage available
- Lifecycle Management
- Versioning
- Encription
- MFA (Multi-Factor Authentication)
- Secure date using Access Control lists and Bucket Policies.

# S3 types
1. S3 standard: 99,99% availability
2. S3 IA (Infrequent Accessed)
3. S3 One Zone -IA
4. S3 Intelligent Tiering
5. S3 Glacier
    - Retrievals data options
        - Expedited: urgent request (1-5 minutes). With two options:
            - On-demand:
            - Provisioned
        - Standard: access archives within 3-5 hours.
        - Bulk retrials: large amount, even petabytes, in a day (5-12 hours)
6. S3 Glacier Deep Archive


| S3 types| S3 Standard | S3 Intelligent Tiering| S3 Standard IA | S3 One Zone - IA |  S3 Glacier | S3 Glacier Deep Archive |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |----------- |----------- |----------- |----------- |
| Durability| 11 9% | 11 9% | 11 9% | 11 9% | 11 9% | 11 9% |
| Availability | 99.99% | 99.9% | 99.9%  | 99.5% | N/A | N/A|
Availability Zones | >= 3 | >= 3 |  >= 3 | 1 | >= 3 | >= 3 |
| Minimum storage duration | N/A | 30 days | 30 days | 30 days | 90 days | 180 days| 
| Comments |Designed to sustain the loss of 2 facilities concurrently | | Lower fee than S3 standard but you are charged a retrieval fee. | not used for data resilience as it uses only one AZ| Retrieval times configurable from minutes to hours. | retrieval time of 12 hours is acceptable.|  

# S3 Encryption ( data at rest)

Server-side encryption options
- S3-Managed Keys (SSE-S3)
- KMS-Managed Keys (SSE-KMS)
- Customer-Provided Keys (SSE-C)

Client-side encryption options
- KMS managed encryption keys (CSE-KMS)
- Custome managed master ecryption keys (CSE-C)

# S3 Payment Model
Pay for what you use:
- GBs per month
- Transfer out of region
- PUT, COPY, POST, LIST and GET requests

Free of charge
- Transfer in to S3
- Transfer out from S3 to CloudFront


# S3 Storage Gateway 

## S3 Storage Gateway Types:
1. File gateway (NFS & SMB): 
    - flat files stored directly on S3
    - store and retrieve files directly using the NFS version 3 or 4.1 protocol.
    - store and retrieve files directly using the SMB file system version, 2 and 3 protocol.
    - access the data directly in S3 from any AWS Cloud application or service.
    - manage S3 data using lifecycle policies, cross-region replication, and versioning.

2. Volume gateway (iSCSI)
    - Stored Volumes: 
        - data stored on site and assynchronous backed up to S3.
        - Gateway-stored volume configuration provides durable and inexpensive off-site backups that you can recover to your local data center or Amazon EC2. For example, if you need replacement capacity for disaster recovery, you can recover the backups to Amazon EC2
        - supports iSCSI protocol.
    - Cached Volumes: 
        - data is stored on S3 and the most frequently accessed data is cached on site.
        - All gateway-cached volume data and snapshot data is stored in Amazon S3 encrypted at rest using server-side encryption (SSE) and it cannot be accessed with S3 API or any other tools
3. Tape Gateway
    - 

## Storage Gateway Facts
- AWS Storage Gateway backs up the data in Amazon Storage as incremental EBS snapshots
- AWS Storage Gateway, by default, uploads data using SSL and provides data encryption at rest when stored in S3 or Glacier using AES-256


## S3 Multipart Upload
The Multipart upload API enables you to upload large objects in parts.

Multipart uploading is a three-step process: You initiate the upload, you upload the object parts, and after you have uploaded all the parts, you complete the multipart upload. Upon receiving the complete multipart upload request, Amazon S3 constructs the object from the uploaded parts, and you can then access the object just as you would any other object in your bucket.

 As a best practice, we recommend you configure a lifecycle rule (using the AbortIncompleteMultipartUpload action) to minimize your storage costs.


## S3 Cross-orign resource sharing (CORS)
A web browser with block the execution of a script that originates from a server with a different domain name than the webpage. Amazon S3 can be configured with CORS to send HTTP headers that allow the script execution.
CORSR defines a way for client web apps that are loaded in one doman to inretact with resources in a different domain.

CORS is configured with a XML document with rules that identify the origns that you will allow to access your bucket, the operations (HTTP methds) that will support for all origin and other operation-specific info.

```json
<CORSConfiguration>
 <CORSRule>
   <AllowedOrigin>http://www.example1.com</AllowedOrigin>

   <AllowedMethod>PUT</AllowedMethod>
   <AllowedMethod>POST</AllowedMethod>
   <AllowedMethod>DELETE</AllowedMethod>

   <AllowedHeader>*</AllowedHeader>
 </CORSRule>
 <CORSRule>
   <AllowedOrigin>http://www.example2.com</AllowedOrigin>

   <AllowedMethod>PUT</AllowedMethod>
   <AllowedMethod>POST</AllowedMethod>
   <AllowedMethod>DELETE</AllowedMethod>

   <AllowedHeader>*</AllowedHeader>
 </CORSRule>
 <CORSRule>
   <AllowedOrigin>*</AllowedOrigin>
   <AllowedMethod>GET</AllowedMethod>
 </CORSRule>
</CORSConfiguration>
```

## S3 Transfer Accelation
Transfer Acceleration takes advantage of Amazon CloudFront’s globally distributed edge locations. As the data arrives at an edge location, data is routed to Amazon S3 over an optimized network path.

## S3 - Uploading objects using a presigned URLs
 The presigned URLs are useful if you want your user/customer to be able to upload a specific object to your bucket, but you don't require them to have AWS security credentials or permissions.
 When you create a presigned URL, you must provide your security credentials and then specify a bucket name, an object key, an HTTP method (PUT for uploading objects), and an expiration date and time. The presigned URLs are valid only for the specified duration.

 ## S3 Cross Region Replication
 Cross-region replication (CRR) allows asynchronous copying of objects accross buckets in different AWS regions. CRR is enabled within a bucket level configuration. 

 Buckets that are configured for bucket replication can be owned by same or different AWS accounts. 

 Types of object replication, and when to use:
    - CRR: cross region replication
        - Meet complicance requirements
        - Minimize latency
    - SRR: single region replication
        - Aggregate logs into a single bucket
        - configure live replication between production and testing accounts.

## S3 References
1. [S3 URL Style] (https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingBucket.html)
2. [S3 Multipart Upload](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/mpuoverview.html)
3. [CORS](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/cors.html)
4. [S3 Transfer Acceleration](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/transfer-acceleration.html)
5. [S3 presigned URLs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/PresignedUrlUploadObject.html)
